There have been very few immersive experiences of pure Hollywood joy like Avengers: Endgame. What Marvel has accomplished in the past decade-plus of films is nothing short of extraordinary. Few studios can manage to get one film right, let alone a trilogy, and bringing Stan Lee’s visions to peacock-colored life for over 20 seamlessly connected films has been one of the significant accomplishments in not just the genre but in movie history. The Marvel era began in 1961. Lee’s comics were created during great oppression, injustice, and economic disparity. They had their fingers on the pulse on what was going on with America. The 1950s were not the “happy days” our parents or grandparents told us about. It was a time when segregation, you know, was still a thing.

Avengers: Endgame is a truly grand spectacle whose scope and feel are on the scale of such big-screen adventure epics as Ben-Hur or Spartacus. Here is a big-budget studio film that delivers everything the fervent fan-base and the mass audience would want to wrap up a generation of films that holds absolutely nothing back. The pressure to stick the landing must have been so great, yet they made it look effortless. The film is worth every penny and looks like it. I’m not sure Gen Z or some younger millennials will appreciate what the Russo brothers accomplished with Endgame. For those of that generation who have no idea or only heard of the Heston chariot film or that gladiator movie starring Dr. Hank Pym’s father, let me clear things up for you: The 22nd entry into the Marvel Cinematic Universe is the Wrestlemania of the genre.

I don’t want to get into too many details (this is a very basic synopsis, withholding all Avengers names, so it is safe to read, but feel free to skip the paragraph if needed) about Endgame. Still, the basic premise is the fallout of the end of Avengers: Infinity War sets up the film where Thanos delivered on what he promised in that half of all human life on earth is gone, families are destroyed, and some species are entirely wiped out. Ironically, whales are now swimming in the Hudson River. This is because the water is cleaner with the lack of ships and less pollution.

The remaining Avengers are left to deal with the results of their failed effort. Their own survivor’s guilt turns some into what they once stood against. All while the threat of the demigod is still very real. The few left standing will need to find a way to stop him.

The three-hour running time of the MCU icing on the cake may be long for some. You would think, especially for the little ones or the upper-thirty-year-old who needs to work the next day. While some question the film’s pacing, which is understandable, the last hour is one of the most satisfying. It’s a tour-de-force, action-packed hour, and emotionally wrecking. One thing I would note: while I appreciate the excitement of the die-hard fan base, the sold-out showing that I was at frequently took me out of the experience with the constant clapping, yelling, discussions, and gyrating body movements over every little reveal or development. (Then again, it was past my bedtime, and the blood sugar was running low).

It’s hard to believe Anthony and Joe Russo started by directing some of the most outstanding episodes in sitcom history with Arrested Development and Community and have now put a stamp on the genre with such films as Winter Soldier, Civil War, Infinity War, and now Endgame (it’s almost enough to let you forgive them for You, Me, and Dupree… I said almost). I’m not sure if I would call the great completion of the Marvel Cinematic Universe the best comic book film of all time. Still, it’s certainly the finest conclusion to a greater ideal Hollywood has ever put together.